---
title: What a year, huh? (2023 Recap)
description: This time, I'm not writing about something techy (well, mostly), or a project. This time, it's more of a personal update. 2023 has been a pretty eventful year for me, and even though I haven't really done that in the past, and I'm not sure how interesting this will be for anyone except myself, I thought it was worth commemorating the milestones that happened in the past year on my own little corner of the World Wide Web.
tags: [ 'free', 'software', 'decentralisation', 'federation', 'communications' ]
publishDate: 2024-01-31T00:00:00
draft: false
thumbnail: /2023-recap/ridelondon2.jpg
---

Hey there!

It's been a while since I haven't posted anything on here. [A couple of
years](https://brendan.abolivier.bzh/matrix-retention-policies/) actually. This
time, though, I'm not writing about something techy (well, mostly), or a
project. This time, it's more of a personal update. 2023 has been a pretty
eventful year for me, and even though I haven't really done that in the past,
and I'm not sure how interesting this will be for anyone except myself, I
thought it was worth commemorating the milestones that happened in the past year
on my own little corner of the World Wide Web.

Also, yes, I know, we're already almost a month into 2024. But some say it's
still fine to wish someone a happy new year as long as it's still January, so
surely this is also fine ðŸ™‚

## A rough start

2023 didn't exactly start on a positive note. [Around mid-December
2022](https://twitter.com/BrenAbolivier/status/1603432581055258626), I learned
that I had lost my job at Element following a round of redundancies. Although
I'm not going to publicly blame anyone responsible for this decision, it would
be wrong to pretend this did not come as a huge shock for me.

Element had been part of my life for over 4 years (over 5 if you start counting
from when I was still an intern), and had been the only company I worked for
since I decided to emigrate from my hometown in France to the UK. This meant I
needed to rethink my life as a British resident, now that a significant part of
it had been ripped away. Worry also quickly settled in, as even though I left
with a comfortable severance package, money can flow pretty fast in the 2nd most
expensive city in the world.

This meant job hunting could not wait. However, within a few weeks, it quickly
became obvious that what I got myself caught into was one of the most brutal
crisis this industry had seen in a while, with big corporations laying off
employees left and right, rendering the job market overcrowded with more and
more people looking for work, but also more and more companies taking the
cautious approach and leveling down their hiring.

So things went on for a while without much success. Some times it became tricky
to prevent the Baserow table I was tracking my applications into from being
filled with red.

![A redacted partial screenshot of a Baserow table with all visible rows labeled "Dead"](/images/2023-recap/dead_ends.png)

But still, I trudged forward, exploring ways in which I could find my next step.
I did some freelancing to help [Unwired
Networks](https://unwirednetworks.com/en/) improve their X509 certificate
verification and handling tooling (while writing [open
source](https://github.com/unwired/certsort)!), and even worked a bit for a
credit card company. There have been several crossroads that could have taken me
to a completely different outcome than the one I ended up with (which we'll get
to in a minute), and although I don't really want to share too many details
here, I'm immensely grateful to everyone who has followed me throughout that
journey, even if just part of it.

## The big 60

At the same time, my love for cycling was picking up. I've already shared bits
of it online, and lots of it privately: cycling has been something I've loved
doing for a very long time now. As I suddenly found myself with some free time
on my hands, and I was coming off a year or two during which I've slowly but
surely been improving on taking care of myself and getting in a better shape, I
thoroughly enjoyed spending time on my bike.

Towards the start of the year, I finally did something I had been pondering for
a while: signing up for a cycling event.
[RideLondon](https://www.ridelondon.co.uk/) had been happening close to me for
quite a while at that point, and I thought it would be a nice challenge to take
on one of their rides, signing up for 60 miles (even though I had initially
settled on 30). This gave me extra motivation to cycle again, and to start doing
longer and longer distances. I spent some amazing weekends cycling through the
British countryside alongside a fellow cyclist friend (thanks a lot, Michael!),
smashing pretty long distances in the process.

The event itself arrived in a timely fashion. Due to some personal events I
won't get into here, the month of May 2023 for me started with one of the worst
mental health breakdowns I had ever experienced. While I spent most of the first
half of the month barely leaving my flat, this upcoming deadling was what I
needed to get out and train.

The ride was honestly one of the best events I've ever attended. While it was
challenging, I surprised myself with how much fun I was having, crossing
milestones while enjoying parts of the countryside I had never been through.

![Me cycling on a paved road surrounded by Epping Forest on each side](/images/2023-recap/ridelondon1.jpg)

Crossing the finish line on Tower Bridge was probably one of the most memorable
moments of my life. It's difficult to put emotions into words, and I'm aware
that a lot of people cycle longer distances during those events. But when I was
cycling down Tower Bridge after almost spending close to 5 hours on my bike, I
couldn't help but think back to a time that wasn't even that far away, barely 3
years back, when I was struggling with anxiety, had a very low self-esteem, and
in no way could be motivated to take much care of myself, let alone exercise.
And that same me had just smashed 60 miles, 100 kilometres, of cycling in one
day.

![Me on a bike, smiling, with London's Tower Bridge behind me](/images/2023-recap/ridelondon2.jpg)

Spoiler alert: I've already signed up for RideLondon 2024, for 100 miles this
time. And I'm so looking forward to it.

## A new beginning

As a number of readers might be aware by this point, I
[joined](https://twitter.com/BrenAbolivier/status/1663853323651350529) the
Thunderbird team at Mozilla in June 2023. This came after months of applying to
job after job and getting rejection after rejection, which was slowly eating
away at my confidence and mental health. In total, I applied to 76 positions,
leading to over 50 rejections, and I'm not counting applications I never heard
back from (though those statistics are still paling in comparison to the ones my
sister once shared with me about her job hunting in the marketing sector). So
this news felt like a ray of sunlight in the middle of a storm: not only did I
find a role that I was happy and interested in, but it's also to work on
software I've been using for well over a decade, as part of an organisation I
had been looking up to for so long.

While getting used to Thunderbird was challenging, it was a welcome challenge.
It felt like the first time in a while that I was able to put my skills to use
to not only improve a project that I feel personally attached to, but also have
a positive impact in areas that matter to me. And to be part of a global
community that I share common values and interests with.

A few months in, the focus of my work started shifting from fixing regressions
(which was a great way to get more familiar with the project) to more
feature-oriented work. I helped research existing code architecture, and design
part of the project's future. As the work to integrate Rust into the code base
(led by [Ikey](https://fosstodon.org/@ikey)) started to come to a close, and my
own work started to gravitate around it, I got to build on top of it to create
some
[documentation](https://source-docs.thunderbird.net/en/latest/rust/index.html)
and [code](https://searchfox.org/comm-central/source/rust/xpcom_async)
[infrastructure](https://searchfox.org/comm-central/source/rust/moz_http) that
will help Thunderbird developers for year to come. Being able to have this kind
of impact on a project that matters so much to me, within barely more than 6
months on the job, is something I'm immensely proud of.

(pssst, if you want to hear more about this, we're giving a
[talk](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2469-thunderbird-how-to-exchange-rot-for-rust/)
on this at FOSDEM this weekend ðŸ‘€)

This section of the post is probably a bit shorter than the others. To be honest,
I'm still struggling to figure out where the last 6 months have gone, because I
don't feel like it's been that long. And it's still just the beginning. Although
I'm approaching my professional life with more caution than I used to, thanks to
past experiences, it feels good to be doing something I enjoy again.

## To 2024

I think it's fair to say 2023 has included some of the highest highs and some of
the lowest lows of my life (some I haven't included here). If you'd asked me a
year from now where I'd be now, I very likely wouldn't have been able to guess
where the year took me, and all of the hurdles and joys I encountered along the
way. I want to reiterate how grateful I am to everyone who's been with me
throughout the whole journey, or just part of it.

If 2024 is as eventful as 2023 was, maybe I'll make another one of these in a
year. Though frankly I kinda hope it isn't. But maybe I'll write something up
regardless; who knows ðŸ™‚

In the meantime, I hope everyone reading this has a smashing 2024. I'm
specifically wishing all the best to everyone I know who's looking for work at
the moment, whether due to layoffs (public and not) or unhappiness with what you
have right now. It's still rough out there, but I know you'll pull through.

See ya!
